add dovetail number 7 (#1480)
carpentries/carpentries.org: _posts/2022/09/2022-09-21-dovetail-007.md

---
layout: page
authors: ["Zhian N. Kamvar"]
teaser: ""
title: "The Dovetail #7: Updates from The Carpentries Workbench"
date: 2022-09-21
time: "09:00:00"
tags: ["Lesson Infrastructure", "Community", "Carpentries Workbench", "Beta", "Dovetail"]
---

This is the seventh post in [a series that we are calling "The Dovetail",
about the transition to The Carpentries Workbench](https://carpentries.org/posts-by-tags/#blog-tag-dovetail).
In this series, we aim to keep members of The Carpentries community abreast of
the current news about [the Workbench](https://carpentries.github.io/workbench). 

If you are interested in participating in discussions around The Carpentries
Workbench, head over to our GitHub Discussions forum: <https://github.com/carpentries/workbench/discussions>

---

We are hard at work drawing up plans for The Beta Phase, which will tentatively
restart on 2022-10-17. I have recruited members from the Curriculum, Workshop

> Administration, Assessment, and Communications teams to help out with the effort.

Reviewer: Maybe specify where these teams are from i.e the core team, just so readers can look into the members if they want

Author: I think this is a good idea. How do I do that without repeating the word "team"?

Reviewer: Perhaps you could rephrase to "core team members from the ...teams" at least then the team would be on opposite sides of the sentence?

By the time the beta phase is over and we convert our lessons (current estimate:

> Q2 2023), the whole community should be aware and excited for the changes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Q2 2023), the whole community should be aware of and excited for the changes!
```

> In news related to the workbench, two things happened recently: 

Reviewer: Should this be bolded or a new subhead or some other way of delineating?

Author: I think so. I've beens struggling to keep to the template I threw together hastily when I created this series -_-

At the beginning of September, Toby Hodges and myself hosted a short, 3 hour,
in-person workshop on developing community lessons with The Carpentries
Workbench at 
[The Conference for Research Software Engineering](https://rsecon2022.society-rse.org/). 

> With over 40 attendees, it was well attended and largely successful. There were 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With over 40 attendees, it was well-attended and largely successful. There were 
```

a few minor hiccups that we did not anticipate, but nothing insurmoutable:

1. We had forgotten to include a live notes document at the beginning of the
   session, so sharing information (such as links for installation instructions)
   were acheived via custom `bit.ly` links.
2. Because we were working with Research Software Engineers, there was an even
   split between folks working on Windows, Mac, and Linux systems, which proved

>    to be interesting for installing the Workbench because, while everyone on

Reviewer: I would change interesting here to another word - it feels like too much of a colloquialism.

Author: Agreed. I was in England too long and these things seeped back in -_-

Author: ```suggestion
   to be a good test for Workbench installation because, while everyone on
```

   Windows was able to install The Workbench successfully, folks on Linux and
   MacOS with R installed from Homebrew needed a couple of extra steps, but this
   was mitigated with the extra instructions we have in [The Workbench setup documentation](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/#setup)

An update to the [R for Ecologists lesson](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/R-ecology-lesson/), which introduces data visualisation and the tidyverse first, was beta tested in a workshop. 

There are a few things to take away from this news that I find interesting:

1. We have indeed lowered the barrier for entry to work on and contribute to our
   lessons. Setup for Windows and Mac used to be very difficult, but now, with a
   default installation of R, folks are able to get setup and working right away.
   Yes, there were some extra steps required for Linux folks and Mac Homebrew

>    folks, but people who have these setups understand the machinery of their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   folks, but people who have these setups tend to understand the machinery of their
```

>    computers a lot better and these caveats are [well documented in the setup](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/index.html#linux). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   computers a lot better, making them better prepared to troubleshoot issues with installation and dependencies as they arise. 
   Furthermore, the caveats for Linux installations are [well documented in the setup](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/index.html#linux). 
```

2. The fact that The R for Ecologists lesson was tested in a workshop recently

>    and I did not hear anything about it means that either of these can be true:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and I did not receive critical feedback about it means that either of these can be true:
```

 - [Jon Wheeler](https://github.com/jonathanwheeler01/), Lesson Developer (in The Carpentries Incubator)
 - Simon Christ, Lesson Developer (in The Carpentries Incubator)
 - [Maneesha Sane](https://github.com/maneesha/), Instructor
 - [Sarah Brown](https://github.com/brownsarahm/), Maintainer
 - [Joel Nitta](https://github.com/joel.nitta/), Translator
 - [Juan Fung](https://github.com/juanfung/), Maintainer
 - [Jannetta Steyn](https://github.com/jsteyn/), Lesson Developer (in The Carpentries Incubator)
 - [Michael Joseph](https://github.com/josephmje/), Lesson Developer (in The Carpentries Incubator)
 - [Sarah Stevens](https://github.com/sstevens2/), Lesson Developer (in The Carpentries Incubator)
 - [Kozo Nishida](https://github.com/kozo2/), Lesson Translation (to Japanese)
 - François Michonneau, Maintainer
 - [Jamie Jamison](https://github.com/jmjamison/), Maintainer
 - Jennifer Stubbs (she/her), Instructor
 - [Drake Asberry](https://github.com/drakeasberry/), Maintainer

## Tips and Tricks for Using The Workbench

**If you use Linux or Homebrew with MacOS** and you want to install The
Workbench locally, you should read some of the caveats in

> [The workbench setup instructions for Linux](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/index.html#linux).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[the workbench setup instructions for Linux](https://carpentries.github.io/sandpaper-docs/index.html#linux).
```

you do not need a compiler in order to use that package because the code is
already compiled and ready to use.

For Linux and Homebrew MacOS systems, the toolchain for compilation is variable
enough that it is not feasible for a global archive network to compile binaries
for all the possible Linux and Homebrew variants, so you get the source code for
the packages and must compile them yourself. 

If you find yourself in this situation, know that there are some external C 
libraries that you need to install. Error messages will let you know what
libraries you need, but the R-universe provides [a handy list of the 
requirements through its API](https://carpentries.r-universe.dev/stats/sysdeps),
which you can query using curl to install:

```r
curl https://carpentries.r-universe.dev/stats/sysdeps 2> /dev/null \
| jq -r '.packages[0] | select(. != null)'
```

```
libcurl4-openssl-dev
libfontconfig-dev
libfreetype-dev
libfribidi-dev
libharfbuzz-dev
libicu-dev
libgit2-dev
libjpeg-turbo8-dev
libpng-dev
libtiff-dev
libxml2-dev
libxslt1-dev
libssl-dev
```

[^1]: The Workbench is hosted on <https://carpentries.r-universe.dev/> and not

>   CRAN because the R-Universe allows for rapid patch fixes and updates, whereas
>   CRAN's policies expect updates on a 2-month cycle. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  CRAN because the R-Universe allows for rapid patch fixes and updates, 
  making it better-suited to newer libraries that are under active development and may change frequently,
  whereas CRAN's policies expect updates on a 2-month cycle. 
```
